pipelines/run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow/README.md, before:

<!--
{% comment %}
Copyright 2018-2023 Elyra Authors

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->
## Run generic pipelines on Apache Airflow

A [pipeline](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html) comprises one or more nodes that are (in many cases) connected to define execution dependencies. Each node is implemented by a [component](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipeline-components.html) and typically performs only a single task, such as loading data, processing data, training a model, or sending an email.

![A basic pipeline](doc/images/pipelines-nodes.png)

A _generic pipeline_ comprises nodes that are implemented using _generic components_. In the current release Elyra includes generic components that run Jupyter notebooks, Python scripts, and R scripts. Generic components have in common that they are supported in every Elyra pipelines runtime environment: local/JupyterLab, Apache Airflow, and Kubeflow Pipelines.

![Generic pipelines and supported runtime environments](doc/images/pipeline-runtimes-environments.png)

The [_Introduction to generic pipelines_ tutorial](../introduction-to-generic-pipelines) outlines how to create a generic pipeline using the Visual Pipeline Editor. 

![The completed tutorial pipeline](doc/images/completed-tutorial-pipeline.png)

In this intermediate tutorial you will learn how to run a generic pipeline on Apache Airflow, monitor pipeline execution using the Apache Airflow GUI, and access the outputs.

The tutorial instructions were last updated using Elyra v3.0 and Apache Airflow v1.10.12.

### Prerequisites

- [JupyterLab 3.x with the Elyra extension v3.x (or newer) installed](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html).
- Access to a local or cloud deployment of Apache Airflow that has been [configured for use with Elyra](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/recipes/configure-airflow-as-a-runtime.html).

> Apache Airflow version 2.x is currently not supported.

#### Information to collect before starting

Gather the following information:

- Apache Airflow API endpoint, e.g. `https://your-airflow-webserver:port`

Elyra currently supports Apache Airflow deployments that utilize GitHub or GitHub Enterprise for Directed Acyclic Graph ([DAG](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts.html#dags)) storage. Collect the following information:

- GitHub server API endpoint, e.g. `https://api.github.com`
- Name and owner of the repository where DAGs are stored, e.g. `your-git-org/your-dag-repo`. This repository must exist.
- Branch in named repository, e.g. `test-dags`. This branch must exist.
- [Personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token) that Elyra can use to push DAGs to the repository, e.g. `4d79206e616d6520697320426f6e642e204a616d657320426f6e64`

Elyra utilizes S3-compatible cloud storage to make data available to notebooks and Python scripts while they are executed. Any kind of cloud storage should work (e.g. IBM Cloud Object Storage or Minio) as long as it can be accessed from the machine where JupyterLab is running and the Apache Airflow cluster. Collect the following information:
- S3 compatible object storage endpoint, e.g. `http://minio-service.kubernetes:9000`
- S3 object storage username, e.g. `minio`
- S3 object storage password, e.g. `minio123`
- S3 object storage bucket, e.g. `airflow-task-artifacts`

### Setup

This tutorial uses the `run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow` sample from the https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples GitHub repository.

1. Launch JupyterLab.
1. Open the _Git clone_ wizard (Git > Clone A Repository).
1. Enter `https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples.git` as _Clone URI_.
1. In the _File Browser_ navigate to `examples/pipelines/run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow`.

   ![Tutorial assets in File Browser](doc/images/tutorial-files.png)
   
   The cloned repository includes a set of Jupyter notebooks and a Python script that download a weather data set from an [open data directory called the Data Asset Exchange](https://developer.ibm.com/exchanges/data/all/jfk-weather-data/), cleanse the data, analyze the data, and perform time-series predictions. The repository also includes a pipeline named `hello-generic-world` that runs the files in the appropriate order.

You are ready to start the tutorial.

### Review the generic pipeline

1. Open the `hello-generic-world` pipeline file.

   ![Tutorial pipeline](doc/images/tutorial-pipeline-in-vpe.png)

1. Right click generic node `Load weather data` and select _Open Properties_ to review its configuration.

   ![View node properties](doc/images/generic-node-properties-1.png)

   A generic node configuration identifies the runtime environment, input artifacts (file to be executed, file dependencies and environment variables), and output files.

   ![Generic node configuration](doc/images/generic-node-configuration.png)

   Each generic node is executed in a separate container, which is instantiated using the configured _runtime image_.

   ![Generic components are executed in containers](doc/images/execution-environment.png)

   All nodes in this tutorial pipeline are configured to utilize a pre-configured public container image that has Python and the `Pandas` package preinstalled. For your own pipelines you should always utilize custom-built container images that have the appropriate prerequisites installed. Refer to the [_runtime image configuration_ topic in the User Guide](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-image-conf.html) for more information. 

   If the container requires a specific minimum amount of resources during execution, you can specify them. For example, to speed up model training, you might want to make GPUs available. 

   ![Customize container resources](doc/images/customize-resources.png)

   > If no custom resource requirements are defined, the defaults in the Apache Airflow environment are used.

   Containers in which the notebooks or scripts are executed don't share a file system. Elyra utilizes S3-compatible cloud storage to facilitate the transfer of files from the JupyterLab environment to the containers and between containers.

   ![Files are exchanged using S3 storage](doc/images/file-inputs-and-outputs.png)

   Therefore you must declare files that the notebook or script requires and declare files that are being produced. The node you are inspecting does not have any file input dependecies but it does produce an output file.

   ![Declare file inputs and outputs](doc/images/file-io-declarations.png)

   Notebooks and scripts can be parameterized using environment variables. The node you are looking at requires a variable that identifies the download location of a data file.

   ![Declare environment variables](doc/images/environment-variable-declarations.png)

   Refer to [_Best practices for file-based pipeline nodes_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/best-practices-file-based-nodes.html) in the _User Guide_ to learn more about considerations for each configuration setting.

### Define a runtime environment configuration

A [runtime configuration](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html) in Elyra contains connectivity information for an Apache Airflow instance and S3-compatible cloud storage. In this tutorial you will use the GUI to define the configuration, but you can also use the CLI.

1. From the pipeline editor tool bar (or the JupyterLab sidebar on the left side) choose _Runtimes_ to open the runtime management panel.

   ![Open runtime configuration panel](doc/images/open-runtime-configuration-panel.png)

1. Click **+** and _New Apache Airflow runtime_ to create a new configuration for your Apache Airflow deployment.

1. Enter a _name_ and a _description_ for the configuration and optionally assign _tags_ to support searching.

   ![Define misc properties](doc/images/define-misc-properties.png)

1. Enter the Apache Airflow server URL, the Kubernetes namespace where Airflow is deployed, and details for the DAG GitHub repository that Airflow is monitoring.

   ![Define Apache Airflow properties](doc/images/define-airflow-properties.png)

   Refer to the [runtime configuration documentation](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#apache-airflow-configuration-settings) for a description of each input field.

1. Enter the connectivity information for your  S3-compatible cloud storage:
   - The _cloud object storage endpoint_ URL, e.g. `https://minio-service.kubeflow:9000`
   - _Username_, e.g. `minio`
   - _Password_, e.g. `minio123`
   - _Bucket name_, where Elyra will store the pipeline input and output artifacts, e.g. `my-elyra-artifact-bucket`

   ![Define object storage properties](doc/images/define-cos-properties.png)

   > Refer to [this topic](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#cloud-object-storage-credentials-secret-cos-secret) for important information about the Cloud Object Storage credentials secret.

1. Save the runtime configuration. 

1. Expand the twistie in front of the configuration entry.

   ![Saved Apache Airflow runtime configuration](doc/images/saved-runtime-configuration.png)

   The displayed links provide access to the configured Apache Airflow GUI and the cloud storage UI (if one is available at the specified URL). Open the links to confirm connectivity.

### Run a generic pipeline on Apache Airflow

You can run pipelines from the Visual Pipeline Editor or using the [`elyra-pipeline` command line interface](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html#running-a-pipeline-using-the-command-line).

1. Open the run wizard.

   ![Run pipeline](doc/images/run-pipeline.png)  

1. The _Pipeline Name_ is pre-populated with the pipeline file name. The specified name is used to name the DAG in Apache Airflow.

1. Select `Apache Airflow` as _Runtime platform_.

   ![Configure pipeline run](doc/images/run-pipeline-using-airflow-config.png)

1. From the _Runtime configuration_ drop down select the runtime configuration you just created.

1. Start the pipeline run. The pipeline artifacts (notebooks, scripts and file input dependencies) are gathered, packaged, and uploaded to cloud storage. Elyra generates a DAG and pushes it to the GitHub repository branch that you've specified in the runtime configuration.

   The DAG name is derived from the pipeline name and concatenated with the current timestamp. Therefore the GitHub repository contains a DAG file for each pipeline run that you initiate from the Visual Pipeline Editor or the Elyra CLI.

   ![Pipeline run submitted confirmation message](doc/images/run-submission-confirmation.png)

   The confirmation message contains three links:
    - _GitHub repository_: Opens the GitHub repository location where the DAG was saved.

      ![DAG in GitHub repo](doc/images/dag-in-github-repo.png)

      > If this link returns a 404 error, make sure you are logged in to GitHub and your id is authorized to access the repository.

    - _Run details_: Links to the Apache Airflow GUI where you monitor the pipeline execution progress.
    - _Object storage_: Links to cloud storage bucket where the input artifacts and output artifacts are stored.

1. Open the run details and object storage links in a new browser tab or window.

### Monitor the DAG run

Elyra does not provide a monitoring interface for Apache Airflow. However, it does provide a link to the Apache Airflow GUI.

1. Open the _Run Details_ link to access the Apache Airflow GUI. 

   ![Inspect DAG](doc/images/inspect-dag-status.png)

   The generated DAG is configured to run only once. When the DAG is executed depends on how frequently Apache Airflow polls the GitHub repository for changes. 

1. Click on the `hello-generic-world` DAG and select the _Graph View_ to access the task information.

   ![Inspect DAG tasks](doc/images/inspect-dag-tasks.png)

1. Click on any completed task and open the log file.

   ![Review task log](doc/images/review-task-log.png)

   Note that the task is implemented using the [`NotebookOp` operator](https://github.com/elyra-ai/airflow-notebook), which downloads the compressed input artifact archive from the cloud storage bucket, extracts the archive, processes the notebook or script, and uploads the output artifacts to the cloud storage bucket.

1. Wait for the DAG run to finish.

### Access the pipeline run outputs

The DAG run outputs (completed notebooks, script output, and declared output files) are persisted in the cloud storage bucket you've configured in the runtime configuration.

Elyra does not automatically download the output artifacts to your JupyterLab environment from the cloud storage bucket after DAG execution has completed. Therefore you have to use an S3 client, or, if configured, the cloud storage's web GUI to access the artifacts.

1. Navigate to the bucket you've specified in the runtime configuration to review the content. 

   ![Review run output artifacts](doc/images/inspect-object-storage-bucket-content.png)

   The bucket contains, for each node, the following artifacts, which are prefixed with the DAG name:
      - a `tar.gz` archive containing the notebook or script, and, if applicable, its declared input file dependencies
      - if the node is associated with a notebook, the artifacts include the completed notebook with it's populated output cells and an HTML version of the completed notebook
      - if the node is associated with a script, the artifacts include the console output that the script produced
      - if applicable, the declared output files 

   For example, for the `load_data` notebook that was executed by the `Load weather data` node, the following artifacts should be present:

   - `load_data-<UUID>.tar.gz` (input artifacts)
   - `load_data.ipynb` (output artifact) 
   - `load_data.html` (output artifact) 
   - `data/noaa-weather-data-jfk-airport/jfk_weather.csv` (output artifact)

1. Download the output artifacts to your local machine and inspect them.

## Export the pipeline as an Apache Airflow DAG

When you run a pipeline from the pipeline, Elyra generates a DAG and uploads it to the configured GitHub repository. If desired, you can customize the DAG by exporting the pipeline instead:

1. Open the pipeline in the Visual Pipeline Editor.
1. Click the _Export Pipeline_ button.

   ![Export pipeline from the editor](doc/images/export-pipeline.png)

1. Select _Apache Airflow_ and the _Runtime configuration_ you've created and export the pipeline.

   ![Select export format](doc/images/export-pipeline-dialog.png)

   > An exported pipeline comprises of two parts: the DAG Python code and the input artifact archives that were uploaded to cloud storage.

1. Locate the generated `hello_generic_pipeline.py` Python script in the JupyterLab File Browser.

1. Open the Python script and briefly review the generated code in the Python editor.

   ![Review exported DAG](doc/images/review-exported-dag.png)

1. To run the DAG, push the file manually to the GitHub repository.

### Next steps

This concludes the _Run generic pipelines on Apache Airflow_ tutorial. You've learned how to 
- create an Apache Airflow runtime configuration
- run a pipeline on Apache Airflow
- monitor the pipeline run progress in the Apache Airflow GUI
- access the pipeline run output on cloud storage
- export a pipeline as a DAG

### Resources

- [_Pipelines_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html)
- [_Pipeline components_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipeline-components.html)
- [_Best practices for file-based pipeline nodes_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/best-practices-file-based-nodes.html)
- [_Runtime configuration_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html)
- [_Runtime image configuration_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-image-conf.html)
- [_Command line interface_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/command-line-interface.html)

Commit message:

added documentation on file run output to S3 storage and logging. Mentioned new runtime env variable ELYRA_GENERIC_NODES_ENABLE_SCRIPT_OUTPUT_TO_S3 (#123)
Signed-off-by: shalberd <21118431+shalberd@users.noreply.github.com>

pipelines/run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow/README.md, after:

<!--
{% comment %}
Copyright 2018-2023 Elyra Authors

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->
## Run generic pipelines on Apache Airflow

A [pipeline](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html) comprises one or more nodes that are (in many cases) connected to define execution dependencies. Each node is implemented by a [component](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipeline-components.html) and typically performs only a single task, such as loading data, processing data, training a model, or sending an email.

![A basic pipeline](doc/images/pipelines-nodes.png)

A _generic pipeline_ comprises nodes that are implemented using _generic components_. In the current release Elyra includes generic components that run Jupyter notebooks, Python scripts, and R scripts. Generic components have in common that they are supported in every Elyra pipelines runtime environment: local/JupyterLab, Apache Airflow, and Kubeflow Pipelines.

![Generic pipelines and supported runtime environments](doc/images/pipeline-runtimes-environments.png)

The [_Introduction to generic pipelines_ tutorial](../introduction-to-generic-pipelines) outlines how to create a generic pipeline using the Visual Pipeline Editor. 

![The completed tutorial pipeline](doc/images/completed-tutorial-pipeline.png)

In this intermediate tutorial you will learn how to run a generic pipeline on Apache Airflow, monitor pipeline execution using the Apache Airflow GUI, and access the outputs.

The tutorial instructions were last updated using Elyra v3.0 and Apache Airflow v1.10.12.

### Prerequisites

- [JupyterLab 3.x with the Elyra extension v3.x (or newer) installed](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/getting_started/installation.html).
- Access to a local or cloud deployment of Apache Airflow that has been [configured for use with Elyra](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/recipes/configure-airflow-as-a-runtime.html).

> Apache Airflow version 2.x is currently not supported.

#### Information to collect before starting

Gather the following information:

- Apache Airflow API endpoint, e.g. `https://your-airflow-webserver:port`

Elyra currently supports Apache Airflow deployments that utilize GitHub or GitHub Enterprise for Directed Acyclic Graph ([DAG](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow/stable/concepts.html#dags)) storage. Collect the following information:

- GitHub server API endpoint, e.g. `https://api.github.com`
- Name and owner of the repository where DAGs are stored, e.g. `your-git-org/your-dag-repo`. This repository must exist.
- Branch in named repository, e.g. `test-dags`. This branch must exist.
- [Personal access token](https://docs.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token) that Elyra can use to push DAGs to the repository, e.g. `4d79206e616d6520697320426f6e642e204a616d657320426f6e64`

Elyra utilizes S3-compatible cloud storage to make data available to Jupyter notebooks and R or Python scripts while they are executed. Any kind of cloud storage should work (e.g. IBM Cloud Object Storage or Minio) as long as it can be accessed from the machine where JupyterLab is running and the Apache Airflow cluster.

Elyra also puts the STDOUT (including STDERR) run output into a file when env var `ELYRA_GENERIC_NODES_ENABLE_SCRIPT_OUTPUT_TO_S3` is set to `true` or not present in the runtime container, which is the default.
This happens in addition to logging and writing to STDOUT and STDERR at runtime.

`ipynb` file execution run/STDOUT output is written to S3-compatible object storage in the following files:
- `<notebook name>-output.ipynb`
- `<notebook name>.html`

.r and .py file execution run/STDOUT output is written to to S3-compatible object storage in the following files:
- `<r or python filename>.log`

Note: If you prefer to use S3-compatible storage for transfer of files between pipeline steps only and **not for logging information / run output of R, Python and Jupyter Notebook files**,
either set env var **`ELYRA_GENERIC_NODES_ENABLE_SCRIPT_OUTPUT_TO_S3`** to **`false`** in runtime container builds or pass that env value explicitely in the env section of the pipeline editor, 
either at Pipeline Properties - Generic Node Defaults - Environment Variables or at
Node Properties - Additional Properties - Environment Variables.

Collect the following information:
- S3 compatible object storage endpoint, e.g. `http://minio-service.kubernetes:9000`
- S3 object storage username, e.g. `minio`
- S3 object storage password, e.g. `minio123`
- S3 object storage bucket, e.g. `airflow-task-artifacts`

### Setup

This tutorial uses the `run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow` sample from the https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples GitHub repository.

1. Launch JupyterLab.
1. Open the _Git clone_ wizard (Git > Clone A Repository).
1. Enter `https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples.git` as _Clone URI_.
1. In the _File Browser_ navigate to `examples/pipelines/run-generic-pipelines-on-apache-airflow`.

   ![Tutorial assets in File Browser](doc/images/tutorial-files.png)
   
   The cloned repository includes a set of Jupyter notebooks and a Python script that download a weather data set from an [open data directory called the Data Asset Exchange](https://developer.ibm.com/exchanges/data/all/jfk-weather-data/), cleanse the data, analyze the data, and perform time-series predictions. The repository also includes a pipeline named `hello-generic-world` that runs the files in the appropriate order.

You are ready to start the tutorial.

### Review the generic pipeline

1. Open the `hello-generic-world` pipeline file.

   ![Tutorial pipeline](doc/images/tutorial-pipeline-in-vpe.png)

1. Right click generic node `Load weather data` and select _Open Properties_ to review its configuration.

   ![View node properties](doc/images/generic-node-properties-1.png)

   A generic node configuration identifies the runtime environment, input artifacts (file to be executed, file dependencies and environment variables), and output files.

   ![Generic node configuration](doc/images/generic-node-configuration.png)

   Each generic node is executed in a separate container, which is instantiated using the configured _runtime image_.

   ![Generic components are executed in containers](doc/images/execution-environment.png)

   All nodes in this tutorial pipeline are configured to utilize a pre-configured public container image that has Python and the `Pandas` package preinstalled. For your own pipelines you should always utilize custom-built container images that have the appropriate prerequisites installed. Refer to the [_runtime image configuration_ topic in the User Guide](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-image-conf.html) for more information. 

   If the container requires a specific minimum amount of resources during execution, you can specify them. For example, to speed up model training, you might want to make GPUs available. 

   ![Customize container resources](doc/images/customize-resources.png)

   > If no custom resource requirements are defined, the defaults in the Apache Airflow environment are used.

   Containers in which the notebooks or scripts are executed don't share a file system. Elyra utilizes S3-compatible cloud storage to facilitate the transfer of files from the JupyterLab environment to the containers and between containers.

   ![Files are exchanged using S3 storage](doc/images/file-inputs-and-outputs.png)

   Therefore you must declare files that the notebook or script requires and declare files that are being produced. The node you are inspecting does not have any file input dependecies but it does produce an output file.

   ![Declare file inputs and outputs](doc/images/file-io-declarations.png)

   Notebooks and scripts can be parameterized using environment variables. The node you are looking at requires a variable that identifies the download location of a data file.

   ![Declare environment variables](doc/images/environment-variable-declarations.png)

   Refer to [_Best practices for file-based pipeline nodes_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/best-practices-file-based-nodes.html) in the _User Guide_ to learn more about considerations for each configuration setting.

### Define a runtime environment configuration

A [runtime configuration](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html) in Elyra contains connectivity information for an Apache Airflow instance and S3-compatible cloud storage. In this tutorial you will use the GUI to define the configuration, but you can also use the CLI.

1. From the pipeline editor tool bar (or the JupyterLab sidebar on the left side) choose _Runtimes_ to open the runtime management panel.

   ![Open runtime configuration panel](doc/images/open-runtime-configuration-panel.png)

1. Click **+** and _New Apache Airflow runtime_ to create a new configuration for your Apache Airflow deployment.

1. Enter a _name_ and a _description_ for the configuration and optionally assign _tags_ to support searching.

   ![Define misc properties](doc/images/define-misc-properties.png)

1. Enter the Apache Airflow server URL, the Kubernetes namespace where Airflow is deployed, and details for the DAG GitHub repository that Airflow is monitoring.

   ![Define Apache Airflow properties](doc/images/define-airflow-properties.png)

   Refer to the [runtime configuration documentation](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#apache-airflow-configuration-settings) for a description of each input field.

1. Enter the connectivity information for your  S3-compatible cloud storage:
   - The _cloud object storage endpoint_ URL, e.g. `https://minio-service.kubeflow:9000`
   - _Username_, e.g. `minio`
   - _Password_, e.g. `minio123`
   - _Bucket name_, where Elyra will store the pipeline input and output artifacts, e.g. `my-elyra-artifact-bucket`

   ![Define object storage properties](doc/images/define-cos-properties.png)

   > Refer to [this topic](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html#cloud-object-storage-credentials-secret-cos-secret) for important information about the Cloud Object Storage credentials secret.

1. Save the runtime configuration. 

1. Expand the twistie in front of the configuration entry.

   ![Saved Apache Airflow runtime configuration](doc/images/saved-runtime-configuration.png)

   The displayed links provide access to the configured Apache Airflow GUI and the cloud storage UI (if one is available at the specified URL). Open the links to confirm connectivity.

### Run a generic pipeline on Apache Airflow

You can run pipelines from the Visual Pipeline Editor or using the [`elyra-pipeline` command line interface](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html#running-a-pipeline-using-the-command-line).

1. Open the run wizard.

   ![Run pipeline](doc/images/run-pipeline.png)  

1. The _Pipeline Name_ is pre-populated with the pipeline file name. The specified name is used to name the DAG in Apache Airflow.

1. Select `Apache Airflow` as _Runtime platform_.

   ![Configure pipeline run](doc/images/run-pipeline-using-airflow-config.png)

1. From the _Runtime configuration_ drop down select the runtime configuration you just created.

1. Start the pipeline run. The pipeline artifacts (notebooks, scripts and file input dependencies) are gathered, packaged, and uploaded to cloud storage. Elyra generates a DAG and pushes it to the GitHub repository branch that you've specified in the runtime configuration.

   The DAG name is derived from the pipeline name and concatenated with the current timestamp. Therefore the GitHub repository contains a DAG file for each pipeline run that you initiate from the Visual Pipeline Editor or the Elyra CLI.

   ![Pipeline run submitted confirmation message](doc/images/run-submission-confirmation.png)

   The confirmation message contains three links:
    - _GitHub repository_: Opens the GitHub repository location where the DAG was saved.

      ![DAG in GitHub repo](doc/images/dag-in-github-repo.png)

      > If this link returns a 404 error, make sure you are logged in to GitHub and your id is authorized to access the repository.

    - _Run details_: Links to the Apache Airflow GUI where you monitor the pipeline execution progress.
    - _Object storage_: Links to cloud storage bucket where the input artifacts and output artifacts are stored.

1. Open the run details and object storage links in a new browser tab or window.

### Monitor the DAG run

Elyra does not provide a monitoring interface for Apache Airflow. However, it does provide a link to the Apache Airflow GUI.

1. Open the _Run Details_ link to access the Apache Airflow GUI. 

   ![Inspect DAG](doc/images/inspect-dag-status.png)

   The generated DAG is configured to run only once. When the DAG is executed depends on how frequently Apache Airflow polls the GitHub repository for changes. 

1. Click on the `hello-generic-world` DAG and select the _Graph View_ to access the task information.

   ![Inspect DAG tasks](doc/images/inspect-dag-tasks.png)

1. Click on any completed task and open the log file.

   ![Review task log](doc/images/review-task-log.png)

   Note that the task is implemented using the [`NotebookOp` operator](https://github.com/elyra-ai/airflow-notebook), which downloads the compressed input artifact archive from the cloud storage bucket, extracts the archive, processes the notebook or script, and uploads the output artifacts to the cloud storage bucket.

1. Wait for the DAG run to finish.

### Access the pipeline run outputs

The DAG run outputs (completed notebooks, script output, and declared output files) are persisted in the cloud storage bucket you've configured in the runtime configuration.

Elyra does not automatically download the output artifacts to your JupyterLab environment from the cloud storage bucket after DAG execution has completed. Therefore you have to use an S3 client, or, if configured, the cloud storage's web GUI to access the artifacts.

1. Navigate to the bucket you've specified in the runtime configuration to review the content. 

   ![Review run output artifacts](doc/images/inspect-object-storage-bucket-content.png)

   The bucket contains, for each node, the following artifacts, which are prefixed with the DAG name:
      - a `tar.gz` archive containing the notebook or script, and, if applicable, its declared input file dependencies
      - if the node is associated with a notebook, the artifacts include the completed notebook with it's populated output cells and an HTML version of the completed notebook
      - if the node is associated with a script, the artifacts include the console output that the script produced
      - if applicable, the declared output files 

   For example, for the `load_data` notebook that was executed by the `Load weather data` node, the following artifacts should be present:

   - `load_data-<UUID>.tar.gz` (input artifacts)
   - `load_data.ipynb` (output artifact) 
   - `load_data.html` (output artifact) 
   - `data/noaa-weather-data-jfk-airport/jfk_weather.csv` (output artifact)

1. Download the output artifacts to your local machine and inspect them.

## Export the pipeline as an Apache Airflow DAG

When you run a pipeline from the pipeline, Elyra generates a DAG and uploads it to the configured GitHub repository. If desired, you can customize the DAG by exporting the pipeline instead:

1. Open the pipeline in the Visual Pipeline Editor.
1. Click the _Export Pipeline_ button.

   ![Export pipeline from the editor](doc/images/export-pipeline.png)

1. Select _Apache Airflow_ and the _Runtime configuration_ you've created and export the pipeline.

   ![Select export format](doc/images/export-pipeline-dialog.png)

   > An exported pipeline comprises of two parts: the DAG Python code and the input artifact archives that were uploaded to cloud storage.

1. Locate the generated `hello_generic_pipeline.py` Python script in the JupyterLab File Browser.

1. Open the Python script and briefly review the generated code in the Python editor.

   ![Review exported DAG](doc/images/review-exported-dag.png)

1. To run the DAG, push the file manually to the GitHub repository.

### Next steps

This concludes the _Run generic pipelines on Apache Airflow_ tutorial. You've learned how to 
- create an Apache Airflow runtime configuration
- run a pipeline on Apache Airflow
- monitor the pipeline run progress in the Apache Airflow GUI
- access the pipeline run output on cloud storage
- export a pipeline as a DAG

### Resources

- [_Pipelines_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipelines.html)
- [_Pipeline components_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/pipeline-components.html)
- [_Best practices for file-based pipeline nodes_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/best-practices-file-based-nodes.html)
- [_Runtime configuration_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-conf.html)
- [_Runtime image configuration_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/runtime-image-conf.html)
- [_Command line interface_ topic in the Elyra _User Guide_](https://elyra.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user_guide/command-line-interface.html)
