pipelines/kubeflow_pipelines_component_examples/run_notebook_component/README.md, before:

### Run notebook component

Use the [_run notebook_ example component](https://github.com/elyra-ai/elyra/blob/master/etc/config/components/kfp/run_notebook_using_papermill.yaml) to run a Jupyter notebook using [Papermill](https://papermill.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

### Prerequisites

To use this component, ensure that you create your pipeline with the accompanying `notebook` in your Jupyterlab workspace root directory.

To review and run the example pipeline for this component, [clone the examples repository](https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples) and launch JupyterLab as shown below:

```
$ jupyter lab --NotebookApp.notebook_dir=examples/pipelines/kubeflow_pipelines_component_examples/run_notebook_component/
```

### Parameters

- **Notebook** (required). The Jupyter notebook to run.
- **Parameters** (optional, defaults to `{}` - no parameters). Parameters to be passed to the notebook.
- **Packages to install** (optional, defaults to `[]` - no packages). Packages to be installed.
- **Input data** (optional). If set, variable `INPUT_DATA_PATH` points to a file that contains the provided input data.

### Outputs

- **Notebook**. The executed notebook.
- **Output data**. Variable `OUTPUT_DATA_PATH` points to a directory where the notebook can store output files.

Commit message:

Update kubeflow pipelines component examples
Include download component in example pipelines to
seed downstream components that require data via
input paths

Fixes elyra-ai/elyra#2024
Fixes elyra-ai/elyra#2025

pipelines/kubeflow_pipelines_component_examples/run_notebook_component/README.md, after:

### Run notebook component

Use the [_run notebook_ example component](https://github.com/elyra-ai/elyra/blob/master/etc/config/components/kfp/run_notebook_using_papermill.yaml) to run a Jupyter notebook using [Papermill](https://papermill.readthedocs.io/en/latest/).

### Prerequisites

Ensure that you have the (Notebook) data downloaded and available via a download step prior to using this component.

To review and run the example pipeline for this component, [clone the examples repository](https://github.com/elyra-ai/examples) and launch JupyterLab as shown below:

```
$ jupyter lab --NotebookApp.notebook_dir=examples/pipelines/kubeflow_pipelines_component_examples/run_notebook_component/
```

### Parameters

- **Notebook** (required). The Jupyter notebook to run.
- **Parameters** (optional, defaults to `{}` - no parameters). Parameters to be passed to the notebook.
- **Packages to install** (optional, defaults to `[]` - no packages). Packages to be installed.
- **Input data** (optional). If set, variable `INPUT_DATA_PATH` points to a file that contains the provided input data.

### Outputs

- **Notebook**. The executed notebook.
- **Output data**. Variable `OUTPUT_DATA_PATH` points to a directory where the notebook can store output files.
